The University of Texas at Dallas (UTD or UT Dallas) is a public research university in the University of Texas System. The main campus is in the Richardson, Texas, Telecom Corridor, 18 miles (29 km) north of Downtown Dallas. Approximately one-third of the campus is located within Dallas county, with plans to open an on-campus DART train stop on the Cotton Belt rail line (2022). The institution, established in 1961 as the Graduate Research Center of the Southwest and later renamed the Southwest Center for Advanced Studies (SCAS), began as a research arm of Texas Instruments. In 1969, the founders bequeathed SCAS to the state of Texas, officially creating The University of Texas at Dallas.

The university has been characterized by rapid growth in research output and its competitive undergraduate admissions policies since its inception. Less than 47 years after its founding, the Carnegie Foundation had classified the university as a doctoral research university with "Highest Research Activity"—faster than any other school in Texas. Further, the university is associated with four Nobel Prizes, and has members of both the National Academy of Science and National Academy of Engineering on its faculty. Research projects include the areas of Space Science, Bioengineering, Cybersecurity, Nanotechnology, and Behavioral and Brain Sciences.

While highly regarded for its strength in STEM studies and research, UTD's business school is also one of the best in the state. The Naveen Jindal School of Management (Jindal or JSOM) ranks above Texas A&M (Mays) and SMU (Cox) according to U.S. News & World Report and Bloomberg Businessweek. Admission into UT Dallas' full-time MBA program is also more selective than UT Austin (McCombs) and Rice (Jones), with approximately one of every four applicants being accepted. Additionally, JSOM is #1 in Texas and #4 globally for the quantity of faculty research published in leading academic business journals.

The University of Texas at Dallas offers more than 140 academic programs across its eight schools and hosts more than 50 research centers and institutes. With a number of interdisciplinary degree programs, its curriculum is designed to allow study that crosses traditional disciplinary lines and to enable students to participate in collaborative research labs. For the spring 2018 commencement, the university granted 2,393 bachelor's degrees, 2,090 master's degrees, and 107 PhDs for a total of 4,590 degrees. The university is well-known for its Audiology, Speech-Language Pathology, Criminology, Engineering, Computer Science, Public Affairs, Political Science, Economics, Business, and Arts & Technology (animation) programs.

The school has a Division III athletics program in the American Southwest Conference and fields 14 intercollegiate teams. The university recruits worldwide for its chess team and has a nationally recognized debate team. Beginning in 2018, UT Dallas began sponsoring a co-ed Varsity eSports program as a part of the college's athletic department. It officially supports competitive teams for League of Legends (ranked No. 8 by ESPN), Overwatch, and Super Smash Bros. Ultimate.
